---

So far it had been a usual morning. Jasoos Rabbit was busy munching on a juicy red carrot in his peculiar style. He bit off half the carrot in the right side of his mouth. As he chewed on it, he adjusted his red colored hat which had two holes to allow his long ears to poke out of it. He believed that a detective’s hat should always look perfect. He bit off the remaining carrot in the left side of his mouth and tossed the leftover stub into a trash basket kept under his desk. Before the stub could land in the basket he had deftly picked up another  carrot. He was quite good at this. A big portrait hung on the wall behind him in which he had tried to do his best Sherlock Holmes impersonation. Instead of a cigar, he had a thick carrot in his mouth. On the bottom of the portrait, it was written in big bold letters in red: “World’s Greatest Detective”. Jasoos liked red, the color of carrots.
A little girl sat next to him. She was wearing oval glasses and her long black hairs were tied neatly in a braid. She was reading that morning’s newspaper supposedly to find some unsolved mystery that Jasoos could help solve. But the truth was that she just loved to read. She would read the whole newspaper starting from the first word on the first page to the last word on the last page. She even read the classifieds! Her head moved rhythmically from left to right, then jerked back to the beginning of the next line. This continued till she reached the end of the page. Only time she had paused was when she had to push her glasses back up the bridge of her nose. They kept on slipping down her little nose.
“Nothing interesting going on”, she announced as she folded the newspaper and slipped it into a drawer under the desk behind which she and Jasoos were sitting. 
“Why don’t you try this carrot Avni? This is very interesting”, offered Jasoos. 
“Jasoos! Do you ever think of anything besides Carrots?”
“There you are wrong Avni. I think of other things as well. Just the other day, I had a wonderful idea. I decided to stop eating carrots! Instead I started eating radishes. But by the end of the day I had come to my senses and realised that a radish does not taste anywhere close to a carrot. So I was back relishing my juicy carrots! Unfortunately I had eaten so many radishes by then that I was quite bloated that night.”
“Jasoos! That’s not what I meant.We have not had a new case to solve for so long now. I am getting bored. I wonder how would you feel if you were stranded on an island in the middle of nowhere without any carrots”
“It would not be that bad. I would grow my own carrots. Have you forgotten that I always keep a packet of carrot seeds in the secret pocket inside my cap.”
“How could I ever forget that!” Avni sighed. “But hey, what if you were stranded on some other planet, like say Mars!! You surely would not be able to grow anything out there.”
“Avni, don’t be ridiculous. How could I ever be on Mars. Do you even know how far it is from earth?” As soon as he said that, Jasoos realised that he had made a big mistake. Of course Avni would know that. He prepared himself for a lecture on Solar System.
“It depends. At its closest, Mars is 54.6 million kilometers away from Earth and at its farthest it is 400 million kilometers away. Venus can get even closer to Earth but you definitely would not want to go there as it is the hottest planet in our solar system. Mercury is..”
“Avni I get the point” Jasoos quickly interrupted Avni before she could rattle off such arcane details about all the 8 planets. “ But even 54.6 million kilometers is quite a fair bit of distance, won’t you agree?”
“Well you surely cannot go there on your rickety rackety bike” Avni said amused. “Today’s newspaper contained a news about the Joint Earth Mission to Mars (JEMM). It seems that it is almost ready for launch. Isn’t that exciting!”
By now Jasoos was getting bored with this conversation. He really did find it hard to think about anything other than carrots for too long. He reached out for another carrot. But his hand stopped halfway to his mouth and his long ears pricked up. He turned his head with a start towards the door. That sudden movement caused his cap to go slightly off center which he quickly adjusted.
Avni had also heard the sound. Someone was climbing up the stairs to the office. Someone with really heavy footsteps that almost shook the whole building. As the approaching sound got louder and louder, Avni quickly arranged the desk to make it look tidy. “Who could this be?” Her eyes fell on the newspaper kept in the still open drawer. As she closed the drawer, she caught a quick glance of a picture next to the news about JEMM. It was the picture of a smartly dressed elephant, Dr Avishkaar. He was the lead scientist on the mission and by now his face was recognized by almost everyone on Earth.
Just then the door opened to reveal the big frame of Dr Avishkaar himself!




---

The carrot dangling from Jasoos’s hand dropped to the ground. His eyeballs bulged out of there sockets. He opened his mouth wide to speak but then closed it back. He did this a few more times but no words came out.
Avni, who had not lost her wits so completely, poked Jasoos with her elbow. Seeing that it had no effect on him, she greeted the great scientist herself: “Dr Avishkaar! What an honour to see you here. Please come in.”
Dr Avishkaar moved in slow but measured steps. Everything about him was immaculate.  His gray coat fit him perfectly doing a great job of covering his enormous girth. His trousers reached exactly till his ankles. His shoes were neatly polished in black reflecting the light falling on them from the bulb above. A blue tie hung from his neck printed with the symbol of Mars mission. A white rocket placed in front of a red circle representing Mars. Avni got goosebumps looking at that symbol. In all he did not look at all like the stereotypical image of a scientist with ruffled hairs and loose fitting clothes. 
Dr Avishkaar sat on the chair kept in front of the desk. The chair creaked a little. His gentle gaze shifted from Jasoos to Avni. He gave Avni a warm smile and then turned back to Jasoos. “Hello Jasoos! Hello Avni” his deep voice seemed to fill the whole room as he offered his hand. Jasoos who was still in shock slowly moved his hand forward and grabbed Dr’s hand. Few seconds passed and then a minute as Dr. waited for Jasoos to let go of his hand. “Can I have my hand back please?” He said politely as Avni tried to suppress her laugh. That snapped Jasoos back to his senses and he offered an apology “I am really sorry. It’s just that..” Dr Avishkaar cut him short with a wave of his hands “ Dont worry. I have seen this happen to many people on meeting me”. “But this young girl here seemed to have handled this rather well. I am impressed.” he continued as he shook Avni’s hands. Avni’s chubby cheeks flushed red with embarrassment.
Jasoos had completely recovered by now. He quickly grabbed a carrot, took a big bite out of it and spoke out of the corner of his mouth  “ So Dr, what brings you here? You must be quite busy these days. I was telling Avni about the upcoming launch of Mars mission just before you came”. Avni shot a quick glance towards Jasoos but she knew that he had a habit of fibbing like this. She did not mind it all that much.
“Yes, that’s correct. In three months from now, the biggest rocket ever made, Pushpak, will take off towards Mars. We have been sending rockets to Mars for many years now, but I am sure you know why this one is special. So far we have placed many rovers on the surface of Mars and many orbiters around it. They have helped us figure out a great many things about the planet. Recently a  breakthrough was made when we discovered water flowing on the surface.”
Avni already knew all this. She had once been to a space museum where an exhibition on Mars rovers was going on. She had stood transfixed looking at the replicas of  rovers. She had marvelled at the wonderful sensors that those rovers carried acting as their eyes and ears. Standing there she had imagined how it would feel to be on the surface of Mars, gazing at its giant mountains and deep canyons reaching down to its belly. After coming back home, she had read up everything about the rovers and the planet.
“But now we feel that the time is ripe to take the exploration of Mars to its next level.” Avishkaar continued. “And Pushpak is that next level because it will not be carrying just rovers. It will also take 6 of our finest astronauts to Mars.”
Avishkaar shifted in his chair a little. The chair creaked some more. Avni looked horrified at the chair, hoping that it will not break under him.
Jasoos had lost all interest by now in this conversation so he decided to get to the point. “Dr. all that is very interesting but it still does not explain why you are here?”
“Is that not obvious? I would like to invite you both to be part of this mission and undertake the historic journey to Mars as 2 of the 6 astronauts!”
“Ah!” cried Jasoos as he bit his tongue. “What! I am sorry I probably misheard you.” said Avni. “No dear girl you heard me alright. Let me repeat. I would like to invite you both to be part of the Mars landing party” Dr Avishkaar said this extremely slowly, stressing on the word Mars.
Jasoos gulped down a whole glass of water. “I think there has been a grave mistake. Maybe you mistook us for astronauts? We are detectives and quite good ones at that. Our job is to solve mysteries here on earth. We have nothing to do with Mars.”
“Please don’t take me for a fool!” Avishkaar was getting slightly irritated now. “I know exactly who you are and what you are good at. You say you like solving mysteries. There is no greater mystery that confronts us right now then the mystery of Mars. We want to unveil all the secrets that Mars has held from us for so long. Is there life on Mars no matter how microscopic? If not then has there ever been life on Mars in past? Can it become a new world for us where one day we can have a settlement? It will be an unfamiliar terrain with nothing but your instincts to guide you. No amount of training on earth can prepare the astronauts for what awaits them on the red planet. I am very sure that skills of both of you will be extremely useful there. So let me ask you both one last time. Would you like to go to Mars?”
Before Jasoos could say anything, Avni who was grinning from ear to ear by now replied: “It will be a privilege Dr Avishkaar. We will forever be grateful to you for giving us this opportunity. “
“Very well then. Your training begins tomorrow. I will see you both tomorrow morning at 8 am at the space center. Now I would like to take your leave as there is still so much left to be done.” Avishkaar stood up and left.
Just as the door closed behind him, the chair on which he was sitting collapsed to pieces. “Oops!” Avni breathed a sigh of relief. And then she let loose a hearty laugh. She had never felt so excited. Not even when they were hot on the trail of Kaliya crow trying to solve the case of missing jewels. “Can you believe this!!” She turned towards Jasoos. 
Things had happened too fast for Jasoos to make sense of. It had turned into a strange stressful morning. He just closed his eyes, leaned back on his chair, slowly munched on his carrot and tried to forget what had just happened. When that did not work, he got up saying: “I think I need to pee”. He took a couple of steps and then collapsed on the floor.


---

Next morning, sharp at 8 am, Avni and Jasoos were at the gates of Space Complex. Avni had to literally drag Jasoos out of his bed to there on time. Space Complex was about half an hour bike ride from there homes and Jasoos had been complaining the entire way. “Why did you accept the offer? Do you realize how dangerous this is? What if we reached there but could never come back? And how will I ever survive there without my carrots?” It seemed to Jasoos as if his worst nightmare had come true. Avni too was feeling butterflies in her stomach, just like she had felt on the first day of school. But she was trying her best to look calm and confident.
There was a big sculpture in front of the gates depicting the Mars mission logo. After they had taken selfies in front of it, they went to the guard standing at the gates. The guard, a big burly Rhino wearing dark glasses, checked their IDs and then escorted them to the training center.
 At the training center, they met there fellow Mars astronauts. Kalpana, a tall lean tigress, was going to be the captain of the mission. She welcomed them both with firm handshakes. She had been to space multiple times and her jacket was decorated with numerous medals. Tutu, a red eared slider, was the mission’s science officer and the smallest member of the crew. He wore glasses, thicker than Avni’s, and had easygoing manners. He waved his little hands at them and squeaked out a “Hi”!. Avni instantly took a liking to him. She looked forward to learning tons of sciency things from him. Rakesh,  a blue peacock, was the pilot of the rocket. He walked towards them elegantly, dragging his iridescent train of feathers behind him and saluted them. Avni realising that he must be from the military, saluted him back. Jasoos also made an awkward attempt at salute but Rakesh had turned back by then.
Drona, a large german shepherd, was there trainer. He led them to a huge hall which was mostly taken up by a swimming pool. It was the biggest swimming pool they had ever seen. It was at least twice as long as the pool in Avni’s swimming class and more scarily, it was many times deeper than that. Through the absolutely still blue water of the pool, they could see a rocket submerged at the far end. 
“ A swimming pool with a rocket inside it!” Jasoos exclaimed. “What is the meaning of this, Avni?” Even Avni was a little puzzled by this. She looked at Tutu and he just smiled back at her knowingly.
“So, are you all ready for a space walk” barked Drona. “Umm Yes sir” Avni and Jasoos replied reluctantly.
 “I can understand how confusing this must be for both of you since this is your first day here. So let me give you a brief introduction to the training. You must know that the journey to Mars is a long one and you will spend many months holed inside the safe confines of the spaceship. But once in awhile you might need to go outside on a little walk! Except that the walk will be slightly different from your regular stroll in the woods here on earth. There will be something missing on that walk. Do you know what?”
“And I don’t mean trees” Drona quickly said looking at Jasoos. Jasoos, who was about to say exactly that, decided to keep his mouth shut.
“Gravity?” said Avni hesitantly.
“Exactly. Lack of gravity means that it is much harder to stop walking. Other thing that will be missing is the atmosphere and the oxygen within it. The space suit you will be wearing will supply you oxygen and keep you insulated from the extreme cold and heat of the space. All this means that you will need to practice to walk in space. But we cannot send you in space every time you need to practice. Instead we will submerge you in this!” Drona pointed at the pool.
“Hmm, we will practice walking in space by swimming in this pool? That does not make much sense to me” Jasoos blurted out.
“Ha! No one is doing any swimming today. You will be lucky to just move your arms the first time you go in.” Drona chuckled. “This pool is actually a Neutral Buoyancy Lab (NBL). When you are inside water, gravity is pulling you down while buoyancy of the water is trying to push you up. We will submerge you in the NBL in such a way that both these forces cancel out. So the net effect will be that of being in space with almost zero external force acting on you. In short you will be completely on your own.”
“Before you go in, you will need to wear a space suit. You will then be lowered into the pool by these pneumatic cranes. You will stay under water for six hours trying to complete a specific task. The cranes will pull you back out after that.”
Avni had been so transfixed by the sight of the pool that she had failed to notice five cranes distributed around the pool, one for each of them.
“Today’s task is for you to repair the solar panels attached to your space craft. There will be tools attached to your space suit to help you finish this task and you should always keep them attached. If you untether the tool and drop it, you will fail the mission. Remember anything that is floating freely in space is gone forever. If you ever feel any discomfort inside the pool, then pull on the cord that will be connected to your suit. We will take you out immediately. Are the instructions clear?”
“Yes sir!” said Avni and Jasoos, with a lot more energy this time. They were both excited by this training especially since they were going to wear real space suits.
“Avni what is a pneumatic crane?” asked Jasoos once Drona was out of earshot.
 “Oh it’s just a regular crane except that it keeps compressed air inside it. It releases that air to get the energy to move things. Remember that experiment we did where we blew up a balloon and then let go of it without tying it up. How it whizzed all around the room till it ran out of air and plopped to the ground. These cranes work exactly like that”
“Well then I do hope that these cranes don’t run out of air otherwise we will remain submerged in that pool. Maybe they will then fetch Dr Avishkaar to pull us out with his huge trunk.” said Jasoos and they both had a good laugh over this.


---

It was time to get ready for the training. There were five space suits pants lying on top of white mats on the floor at the side of pool. They were all of different sizes. Rakesh’s was the widest to cover his feathers while Tutu’s was the smallest. Jasoos hopped to his pants and tried to lift them up casually. He could not even move them. He applied a bit more force and managed to lift them up a little bit but then they slipped out of his hands and dropped with a thud onto the soft mat.
Kalpana burst out laughing: “That is not how you wear them. They are far too heavy for that. Let me show you”. She lay down on the mat and wiggled into her pants with just a little bit of effort. Then one of the trainers standing by the side helped her put on the shoes and stand up. She winked at Jasoos and Avni: “Easy peasy!”
It did not turn out to be that easy for them. The pants were made exactly to their size with no extra width. By the time they were done, they were both red faced and huffing with the effort. The trainers helped them stand up and walk slowly towards the cranes to which the top halves of the suits were attached. There was a platform below the suit for them to stand on.
“Now how do we get into these?” Jasoos asked. “Like a turtle!” Tutu replied and showed them. They followed his lead and bent down below the vests. Then they slid upwards into it while standing up. As there heads emerged out of the opening on the top, they did resemble a turtle! Rakesh informed them that the suit weighed many times their weight with the top half being much heavier. There was a backpack attached to the top half which would usually contain an oxygen tank, batteries for powering the suit, fans and many other little things. For this training it was just a dummy backpack because oxygen and power would be supplied through the cord attached to the suit. But it weighed almost the same as an actual one. There was a control panel attached to the front of the vest to control all the gadgets in the backpack. Various tools were also strapped in the front of the suit.
The trainers attached the arms and the gloves to the vest. Drona gave them the final instructions. If they ever got into any kind of trouble, they were to pull on their cord. There would be other divers around them in the water who would help them get off the crane and would be there to provide any kind of support they needed. Finally the helmets were lowered onto their heads and suddenly it became very quiet. The helmets were completely sound proof. Drona pointed to them to turn on the radios. As Avni turned hers on, her ears filled up with crackling of the radio. She felt as if the sound was all around her trying to find a way to escape through the helmet. Then Drona’s voice broke through it: “Remember, space does not give you second chances so better be very careful. Good luck!”. Avni looked around at all of her fellow astronauts standing on their respective platforms and raised her thumb wishing luck. One by one everyone else also raised their thumbs. They were all ready to take the plunge.
The platforms were pushed out till they were completely over the pool. The cranes then started whirring and lowered them all into the pool till they were a few feet inside. Divers, who were already inside the pool, unhooked them from the platforms and led them towards the submerged rocket. Avni took hold of the handrail attached to the rocket with both her hands. She tried to move around while still holding onto the handrail and was surprised at how light she felt. She took one hand off, put her palm onto the surface of the rocket and closed her eyes. She imagined she was standing out there in space with the stars shining all around and Pushpak in front of her. 
Kalpana’s voice brought her back to reality. “I want all of you to let go off the hand rails and feel what it would be like to be afloat in space.” Jasoos also took one hand off but both he and Avni were too scared to take the other one off. One of the divers moved closer to Avni and nodded at her. She let go. She had expected that she would start sinking but to her great amazement, she stayed exactly where she was, suspended in the pool with the cord stretched out behind her like a spider hanging down from her web. 
“Wow, this is amazing Avni!” Jasoos spoke through the radio. He was also hanging there in the pool exactly like her. 
Kalpana instructed each of them to move to a different part of the rocket and test the solar panels attached there.  They grabbed back the hands rails and slowly progressed through the water. Once they got to the panels, they began testing each solar cell meticulously. It turned out that Jasoos’s panels were defective so they all moved there to help him replace them. Kalpana and Rakesh pushed the big box of replacement cells to the spot. In the meantime Tutu and Jasoos had unscrewed the faulty cells. Then Avni and Kalpana got to work attaching the cells as Rakesh handed then out from the box.
Avni had thought that six hours would be ample time. But working inside the pool was quite slower than what she had expected. There were only a few minutes left by the time they were done. But they were all ecstatic that they had managed to complete the task on time. Now it was time to get out of the pool.


---

Divers helped the astronauts back on to the platform and reattached their suits. The cranes started whirring again and slowly the platforms began rising up. Jasoos was utterly exhausted and he could not wait to get out of his suit. He was also looking forward to hogging on a bowl full of carrots in the space center’s cafeteria. Once he was completely out of water, he turned his head to look at how Avni was doing.
Avni was not there.
He looked down and saw that Avni was still in the pool and her platform was not moving. He moved his head and saw worried faces all around him. “Avni!” he hollered into his radio. There was no reply.
Then a diver jumped into the pool and swam towards Avni. He had an oxygen cylinder in his hands. He motioned to Avni to hold her breath and then took off her helmet. Then he quickly put the mouthpiece, which was connected to the cylinder, inside Avni’s mouth. Immediately bubbles started escaping out of the two sides of the mouthpiece. 
By this time, Jasoos had been helped out of his space suit. He hopped to Tutu and asked him what had gone wrong with Avni’s crane. Tutu looked crestfallen and mumbled: “Jasoos, there has been some sort of malfunction in the power supply to Avni’s crane. Her crane has stopped working. The same power supply was also used to power up the other equipments like her radio and her oxygen supply. None of that is working. You must have seen that Avni has been supplied with an emergency oxygen tank so that she can keep on breathing till the crane is fixed. But I am really worried Jasoos. We have no idea what has gone wrong with the power supply.”
“But can’t we all jump inside the water and just push Avni up?”
“No the space suit is far too heavy for that.” said Kalpana who had joined them.
“Can she get out of the suit?”
“Doesn’t work. She will have to remove the oxygen supply to be able to do that. But that will risk her inhaling lot of water in the time it takes to wiggle out of the suit.”
Jasoos was desperate by now. Avni was not just his assistant but also his best friend. “There has to be some way.” he shrieked.
“Don’t panic Jasoos. All of us need to be calm. Many such situations await us and panicking will not help us get out of them. We need to think on our feet.” Kalpana chided him.
“There is only one way to get Avni out of that pool. We need to get that power supply working.” said Rakesh.
“But how would we do that. None of us knows anything about electrical stuff” said Tutu.
Jasoos had calmed down a little. He tried to remember what Avni had told him about these cranes.
“Avni had told me that these cranes work by using compressed air. Then why do they need electricity?” He wondered aloud.
“There is a compressor attached to each crane which uses electricity to compress the ambient air. Without the power supply, the compressor does not work which means there is no compressed air for the crane to use” Tutu explained.
“I see.” Jasoos was deep in thought by now. His right hand, closed in a fist, moved back and forth across his mouth which was chewing on an imaginary carrot. “Compressed air, compressed air, compressed air” he repeated absent mindedly.
Then he once again looked down into the pool. He was to relieved to see the diver standing there with oxygen cylinder in his hands, supplying oxygen to Avni.
Suddenly his hand went still. His mouth stopped chewing. He looked up at his colleagues.
“OXYGEN CYLINDER!! That’s it. Why did I not think of this before!” he shouted excitedly.
“Umm yes we can see that Avni is breathing from the cylinder. But how does that help us fix the power supply?” Kalpana asked.
“Don’t you get it. We have been targeting the wrong thing all this while. We don’t need to fix the power supply. We just need to get the crane working by supplying it with compressed air. And those oxygen cylinders are full of compressed air!”
“You are a genius Jasoos!” saying that Kalpana ran towards the crane. Jasoos followed behind her.
“Bring all the oxygen cylinders to the crane.” She shouted to the divers.
Jasoos and Kalpana quickly removed the compressor. Then they attached an oxygen cylinder in its place. Jasoos watched with bated breath as Kalpana opened up the valve of the cylinder. They could hear the hiss of the oxygen as it filled up the crane. And then Jasoos saw Avni’s platform move up a little bit.
“Bingo! This works”
The cylinder quickly ran out of air and they replaced it with another one and then another one and then another one and so on. Each time the platform would move up a little bit and then stop.
Finally Avni’s face emerged out of the water. She took the mouthpiece out and took a deep breath.
“It feels good to breath in the fresh air after so long!”
“Avni I am so glad you are all right.” said Jasoos as he attached the next cylinder. 
Soon Avni was completely out of the water. Jasoos and Kalpana then pulled the platform to the side of the pool and helped Avni out of the suit. Jasoos gave a big hug to Avni and everyone else high fived her.
Dr Avishkaar had also come to the training hall and he congratulated and shook hands with all of them.
“Well done cadets! This is exactly the kind of quick thinking and teamwork you will need to get to Mars and survive there. Now I feel more confident about this mission. And I am particularly impressed with Jasoos. My decision to pick you for the Mars mission seems like a good one!”
Later Jasoos and Avni went to the cafeteria. Jasoos took the biggest bowl kept there and filled it to the top with carrots. In fact in his eagerness he overfilled it and dropped a few of them on the ground. He looked sheepishly at Avni.
“It’s ok Jasoos. We all know that at least this time you have earned this big bowl!” Avni laughed. Then she got serious and said: “By the way thanks a lot for helping me back there. I was really scared when I was stuck inside that pool but I knew you would figure out something.”
“Nebba monna Abbo” Jasoos tried to say something but since his mouth was full of carrots, he made no sense at all to Avni.
Avni just laughed some more and decided to let him eat his carrots peacefully.


---

Three months full of rigorous training passed quickly. Launch day was finally here. Both Avni and Jasoos could not sleep the previous night. They had a swarm of butterflies in their tummies. They were also feeling a bit sad at leaving the earth behind. But the overwhelming feeling was that of excitement. This was going to be the biggest adventure of their lives.
They put on the orange colored space suits. These were special purpose suit which were to be worn only during launch and landing of the rocket. They were not as heavy as the big suits they had worn in the pool and the ones they would use during space walks and on the surface of mars. In these orange suits, they could walk around without too much difficulty. 
They met up with the other three astronauts. All five of them, clad in orange, walked towards the bus that would take them to the launch pad. There was a big crowd gathered around the bus which greeted them with huge cheers. Avni and Jasoos waved to the crowd before boarding the bus. At the launch pad, they were met by Dr Avishkaar. 
“I will see you back in six months. Good luck!” 
That was all that Dr Avishkaar said before he and the other people at the launchpad departed in the same bus that had brought the astronauts there. Now it was just the five of them left on the launchpad. Suddenly the realization hit Avni that from then on it would just be the five of them for next six months. They would need to watch out for each other.
Then they all looked up. The sparkly white rocket was unimaginably tall. It was the biggest rocket ever made. Avni felt really tiny standing next to that. The rocket was actually made of two parts. The lower part, called booster, was just a really big tube containing lots of fuel and many super powerful engines at the bottom. It was really like an inverted giant matchstick. The upper part was the spaceship. This is where the astronauts would be and this would make the journey to Mars and back. It had engines of its own.
She was amazed that something so huge could travel all the way to a planet which was fifty five million kilometers away.
“Jasoos are you feeling the same way as me?”
“Yes Avni. I too am feeling a pain in my neck looking so high!”
“What! Pain in the neck! Jasoos can you ever be serious”
All of them burst out into a hearty laughter. Then an elevator took them to the top of the launch tower. From there they moved inside the spaceship via a connecting bridge. There were five seats for them. Rakesh and Kalpana sat in the two at the front while Avni, Jasoos and Tutu sat in the three at the back.
“Strap your belts, hang on tight and remember there is a brown bag in the pocket of your seat” Kalpana ordered.
“Brown bag? What is that for?” Jasoos enquired.
“You will know soon enough” Rakesh replied. Tutu chuckled.
Rakesh pressed the button which put the giant matchstick on fire. As all the engines of the booster came on, there was a deafening roar. The spaceship started vibrating like a big grinder and Avni felt as if she would be thrown out of the ship. After a few seconds, she felt a huge weight on her chest as if a t-rex had stepped on her with its giant feet. The rocket had lifted off from the launchpad.
After a few minutes, all the fuel in the booster had been burnt and the booster separated from the spaceship. As the booster fell down towards the earth, the spaceship soared higher and higher.
“Shutting down main engines” Kalpana announced and shut down the engines. The imaginary dinosaur with its giant feet disappeared and Avni gasped for breath. Jasoos vomited into the brown bag kept in the pocket of his seat. It was mostly carrot puree!
Avni had a pen in her pocket. She watched amusedly as it slowly slipped out it and started floating upwards. She let it reach her eye level and quickly caught hold of it. This time she attached it to her pocket. The spaceship had settled into an orbit around earth.
“Yay we are going to Mars!” Jasoos announced.
“Not yet.” Tutu corrected him. “Right now we are going around Earth just like Moon. Look out of the window”
Earth looked beautiful. A big blue ball. Once in a while, as they kept moving, they would fly over a continent. But it was mostly just water. Avni knew that Earth’s surface was 70% water but this was the first time she had truly appreciated that.
Booster returned to the launchpad. It was refueled and a tanker full of fuel was attached to it. It took off again, delivered the tanker to the spaceship and fell back down to earth. The tanker attached itself to the spaceship and emptied its belly into the spaceship’s. Then it too went back to earth. This process repeated a few times till the spaceship’s fuel tank was full.
Dr Avishkaar had told them that this was much cheaper then filling the fuel tank of spaceship on earth. In that case the spaceship would have been much more heavier and they would have needed a much bigger booster. Avni couldn’t imagine how the booster could be much bigger than what it already was.
“Starting up second stage engines” Kalpana said.
Jasoos’s face filled up with horror. “WHAT! I don’t want to vomit again.”
“Dont worry. It won’t be so bad. You need much more thrust to escape from Earth’s gravity but not so much anymore.” Rakesh comforted him.
The spaceship spread its wings out. There were hundreds of solar cells attached to them. These solar cells would be powering the ship on its long journey. Second stage engines came to life and started burning the fuel consisting of methane and oxygen. Spaceship left the orbit. Avni could see Earth getting smaller and smaller as it receded into distance. Soon she lost track of it.
Pushpak was on its way to Mars.


---

Journey to Mars was mostly uneventful. They had watched in wonder as the spaceship had sped past Moon on the same day that they had left Earth’s orbit. Kalpana had pointed out to them, the landing site of first astronauts on Moon, “Sea of Tranquility”.  Avni informed Jasoos that one half of the moon is never visible from Earth and is called “Dark side of the Moon”. Now they had become one of the very few to actually look at that side as the spaceship crossed moon and went beyond it. She also told him that Mars was around 200 times more distant from earth than Moon.
They also had to venture out for a spacewalk a few times. But the many hours spent practicing in the giant pool had prepared them well and they did not have much trouble. In fact one time they had to go out and actually replace some solar cells, just like the first day of the training. But this time there was no power failure!
Now exactly 80 days from the day they had left their home planet, they were preparing to land on another one. They were all strapped in chairs just like they had been during take off from earth. Mars loomed large in front of them. Through the huge front window of the ship, they could clearly see the large craters, deep canyons and numerous volcanoes. And to Avni’s surprise, it did not appear red. Mostly it looked brownish, quite like butterscotch. But there were other colors here and there: golden, greenish, tan. One color it definitely did not have was blue of the oceans and that is what made it look so different from earth. 
The ship then made an about turn so that they could land upright onto Mars and slowly Mars disappeared from there view. 
“We are about to begin our descent and things are going to get real hot!” said Kalpana.
“Mars’s atmosphere is 1000 times thinner than that of Earth but it contains lot more carbon dioxide and dust so it generates lot of heat” explained Tutu.
Luckily there was a highly advanced heat shield around there ship which should absorb all that heat. So they were not really worried about it. But the thin atmosphere made the landing tricky in a different way. It would not slow down the ship a lot so there was a risk that they might crash into Mars at a high speed. To prevent that, they would use there own engines to slow down.
“Begin descent now” Kalpana ordered. Rakesh pressed a button and shut down all the engines. Suddenly they were falling freely under the influence of Mars’s gravity. They felt a massive force trying to push them up. They were lifted off the chairs and the straps holding them to the chair stretched extremely tight. If not for them, they would surely have broken through the front window of the ship and flown out.
Spaceship’s speed kept on increasing as they got closer and closer to the surface. Their straps got tighter and tighter. A dial in front of Kalpana displayed the speed. There was a red line on the dial and if the needle of the dial crossed that, they would not be able to slow down in time and crash. All the five pairs of eyes were fixed on the dial. Needle was now almost on top of the line. Avni’s heart skipped a beat.
She looked at Rakesh. Rakesh winked at her and said: “Dont worry. Its all under control”. One of the engines came on. Immediately they felt the straps relax a little. The powerful engine started pushing the spaceship up against the might of gravity. 
 Needle stopped moving and then slowly it moved away from the danger line. They were still hurtling down pretty fast though and still felt a lot of pressure upwards. Then two more engines started burning.  The combined thrust of three engines caused the spaceship to slow down considerably. The pressure on the astronauts lifted almost completely and  they dropped back down into the seats. The spaceship came to a halt with a soft thud. A cloud of Martian dust rose up a few inches in the air around the ship and then slowly fell down.
Pushpak had landed!
Jasoos once again vomited into a brown bag.
Other astronauts opened there straps, stood up and hugged each other.
